[Concept Entry] MySQL built-in-functions (#4841)
Codecademy/docs: content/mysql/concepts/built-in-functions/built-in-functions.md

---

> Title: 'Built-in Functions' # Required; the file name should be the same as the title, but lowercase, with dashes instead of spaces, and all punctuation removed
> Description: 'Built-in functions are predefined functions that can be used to perform operations on data at any time.' # Required; ideally under 150 characters and starts with a noun (used in search engine results and content previews)
> Subjects: # Please only use Subjects in the subjects.md file (https://github.com/Codecademy/docs/blob/main/documentation/subjects.md). If that list feels insufficient, feel free to create a new Subject and add it to subjects.md in your PR!
>   - 'Code Foundations'
>   - 'Data Science'
>   - 'Data Visualization'
> Tags: # Please only use Tags in the tags.md file (https://github.com/Codecademy/docs/blob/main/documentation/tags.md). If that list feels insufficient, feel free to create a new Tag and add it to tags.md in your PR!
>   - 'MySQL'
>   - 'Data'
> CatalogContent: # Please use course/path landing page slugs, rather than linking to individual content items. If listing multiple items, please put the most relevant one first
>   - 'learn-sql'
>   - 'paths/analyze-data-with-sql'
>   - 'paths/data-science'
>   - 'paths/data-science-foundations'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Title: 'Built-in Functions'
Description: 'Built-in functions are predefined functions that can be used to perform operations on data at any time.'
Subjects:
  - 'Code Foundations'
  - 'Data Science'
  - 'Data Visualization'
Tags:
  - 'MySQL'
  - 'Data'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-sql'
  - 'paths/analyze-data-with-sql'
  - 'paths/data-science'
  - 'paths/data-science-foundations'
```

```
| lowercases | Uppercase |
|------------|-----------|
| Nelson     | NELSON    |
| Jo�o       | JO�O      |
| Ana        | ANA       |

## Numeric Functions

Numeric functions allow to perform operations on numeric data.

### Syntax

`ABS()` returns the absolute value of a number.

`ABS(value)`

### Example

In the following example, there are two columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to three queues.
The table **digits** will take the numbers and return the absolute value of each (even if the number is negative because it is related to its distance from 0).

Here is a complete example with MySQL code:

```sql
CREATE TABLE digits (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    digit INT
);

INSERT INTO digits (digit) VALUES
(-5),
(10),
(-15);
```

The example results in the output below:

```shell
#Query to get the absolute value of the numbers
SELECT digit, ABS(digit) AS AbsoluteValue FROM digits;
```
| digit | AbsoluteValue |
|-------|---------------|
| -5    | 5             |
| 10    | 10            |
| -15   | 15            |

### Syntax

`CEIL()` returns the smallest integer value that is greater than or equal to a number.

`CEIL(value)`

### Example

> In the following example, there are two columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to three queues.
> The table **digits1** below will take the numbers and return the closest integer value that is greater than or equal to each. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, there are two columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to three queues. The table **digits1** below will take the numbers and return the closest integer value that is greater than or equal to each.
```

Here is a complete example with MySQL code:

```sql
CREATE TABLE digits1 (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    digit1 FLOAT
);

INSERT INTO digits1 (digit1) VALUES
(21.6),
(10.3),
(15.9);
```
The example results in the output below:

```shell
#Query to get the ceiling value of the numbers
SELECT digit1, CEIL(digit1) AS CeilingValue FROM digits1;
```

| digit1 | CeilingValue |
|--------|--------------|
| 21.6   | 22           |
| 10.3   | 11           |
| 15.9   | 16           |

### Syntax

`ROUND()` rounds a number to a specific number of decimal places.

`ROUND(number, decimals)`

### Example

> In the following example, there are two columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to three queues.
> The table **digits2** will take the numbers and round them to the number of decimal places inserted into the second `ROUND()` argument.
> In this case, the numbers are rounded to two decimal places.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, there are two columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to three queues. The table **digits2** will take the numbers and round them to the number of decimal places inserted into the second `ROUND()` argument. In this case, the numbers are rounded to two decimal places.
```

| Codecademy Party | 2024-06-21 15:02:14 | 2024-06-21 15:02:14 |

### Syntax

`DATE_ADD()` adds a time interval to a date.

`DATE_ADD(date, INTERVAL value unit)`

### Example

In the following example, there are two columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to one queue.
The table **events2** below will take the value (to count the number of unit) and the unit (DAY in this case, but can also be MONTH, or YEAR) to calculate the **INTERVAL** between the event_date and NextWeek.
The result are seven days in this case.

A complete example with MySQL code would be like this:

```sql
CREATE TABLE events2 (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    event_date DATE
);

INSERT INTO events2 (event_date) VALUES
('2024-06-21');
```
The example results in the output below (at the time it was consulted):

```shell
#Query to get the date one week after the event_date
SELECT event_date, DATE_ADD(event_date, INTERVAL 7 DAY) AS NextWeek FROM events;
```

| event_date | NextWeek   |
|------------|------------|
| 2024-06-21 | 2024-06-28 |

### Syntax

`DATEDIFF()` returns the number of days between two dates.

`DATEDIFF(date1, date2)`

### Example

> In the following example, there are two columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to one queue.
> The table **events3** below will take the value of **start_date** as well as the value of **end_date** as arguments in the `DATEDIFF()` and will return the number of days between the two dates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, there are three columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to one queue. The table **events3** below will take the value of **start_date** as well as the value of **end_date** as arguments in the `DATEDIFF()` and will return the number of days between the two dates.
```

`IF()` returns a value if a condition is true, and another value if it is false.

`IF(condition, true_value, false_value)`

### Example

In the following example, there are three columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to five queues.
The table **exams2** below will take the values from *student_name* and from *score* and make a comparison.
IF the students' score is higher than 60, the corresponding students pass, otherwise they fail. 

Below a complete example using MySQL code:

```sql
CREATE TABLE exams2 (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    student_name VARCHAR(50),
    score INT
);

INSERT INTO exams2 (student_name, score) VALUES
('Nelson', 85),
('Ana', 58),
('Jo�o', 92),
('Lidia', 45),
('Afonso', 74);
```

The example results in the following output:

```shell
#Query to determine if each student passed or failed
SELECT student_name, score, IF(score > 60, 'Pass', 'Fail') AS Result FROM exams2;
```

| student_name | score | Result |
|--------------|-------|--------|
| Nelson       | 85    | Pass   |
| Ana          | 58    | Fail   |
| Jo�o         | 92    | Pass   |
| Lidia        | 45    | Fail   |
| Afonso       | 74    | Pass   |

### Syntax

> CASE is a statement that goes through conditions and returns a value when the first condition is met(like an if-then-else statement).
> Once a condition is true, it will stop reading and return the result.
> If no conditions are true, it returns the value in the ELSE clause.
> If there is no ELSE part and no conditions are true, it returns NULL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CASE is a statement that goes through conditions and returns a value when the first condition is met and closes with a END clause
```

> ```sql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```pseudo
```

CASE
    WHEN condition1 THEN result1
    WHEN condition2 THEN result2
    ...
    ELSE result
END
```

### Example

In the following example, there are three columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to five queues.
The table **exams3** below will take the values from *student_name* and from *score* and make a comparison.
**When** the score is higher or equal than 90, **then** the Grade is A.
**When** the score is higher or equal than 80, **then** the Grade is B.
**When** the score is higher or equal than 70, **then** the Grade is C.
Otherwise, the grade is F.

Below a complete example using MySQL code:

```sql

> CREATE TABLE exams3 (
>     id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
>     student_name VARCHAR(50),
>     score INT
> );
> 
> INSERT INTO exams3 (student_name, score) VALUES
> ('Nelson', 85),
> ('Ana', 78),
> ('Jo�o', 92),
> ('Lidia', 65),
> ('Afonso', 88);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE TABLE exams3 (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    student_name VARCHAR(50),
    score INT
);

INSERT INTO exams3 (student_name, score) VALUES
('Nelson', 85),
('Ana', 78),
('Joao', 92),
('Lidia', 65),
('Afonso', 88);

SELECT student_name, score,
       CASE
           WHEN score >= 90 THEN 'A'
           WHEN score >= 80 THEN 'B'
           WHEN score >= 70 THEN 'C'
           ELSE 'F'
       END AS Grade
FROM exams3;
```

```

> The example results in the following output:
> 
> ```shell
> #Query to categorize each student's score into grades
> SELECT student_name, score,
>        CASE
>            WHEN score >= 90 THEN 'A'
>            WHEN score >= 80 THEN 'B'
>            WHEN score >= 70 THEN 'C'
>            ELSE 'F'
>        END AS Grade
> FROM exams3;
> ```
> 
> | student_name | score | Grade |
> |--------------|-------|-------|
> | Nelson       | 85    | B     |
> | Ana          | 78    | C     |
> | Jo�o         | 92    | A     |
> | Lidia        | 65    | F     |
> | Afonso       | 88    | B     |
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example results in the following output:

| student_name | score | Grade |
|--------------|-------|-------|
| Nelson       | 85    | B     |
| Ana          | 78    | C     |
| Joao         | 92    | A     |
| Lidia        | 65    | F     |
| Afonso       | 88    | B     |
```

`AES_ENCRYPT()` encrypts a string using AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) encryption, and returns the original (binary) in [hexadecimal format](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/hexadecimal).

`AES_ENCRYPT(str, key_str)`

### Example

In the following example, there are 3 columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to one queue.
The table **secrets** below will take the value *SecretText* from **plain_text** and will represent it in a binary code of [hexadecimal encrypted message](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/hexadecimal).

Below a complete example using MySQL code:

```sql
CREATE TABLE secrets (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    plain_text VARCHAR(50),
    encrypted_text VARBINARY(50)
);

INSERT INTO secrets (plain_text, encrypted_text) VALUES
('SecretText', AES_ENCRYPT('SecretText', 'key'));
```

The example results in the following output:

```shell
-- Query to select the encrypted text
SELECT plain_text, AES_ENCRYPT(plain_text, 'key') AS EncryptedText FROM secrets;
```

| plain_text | EncryptedText                   |
|------------|---------------------------------|
| SecretText | (encrypted text representation) |

> > [!NOTE]
> > When dealing with encrypted data, we usually store the result in a 'VARBINARY' column because the encrypted data is binary. For display purposes, we might convert it to a readable format using functions like ['HEX()'](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/built-in-functions/hex) if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** When dealing with encrypted data, we usually store the result in a 'VARBINARY' column because the encrypted data is binary. For display purposes, we might convert it to a readable format.
```

### Example

The output will be the display of a hexadecimal representation of encrypted text.

```shell
-- Query to select the encrypted text in hexadecimal format
SELECT plain_text, HEX(AES_ENCRYPT(plain_text, 'key')) AS EncryptedText FROM secrets;
```

> | plain_text   | EncryptedText                    |
> |--------------|----------------------------------|
> | MySecretText | 3B848449488F8A90A66B042F5BA648C9 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| plain_text   | EncryptedText                    |
|--------------|----------------------------------|
| MySecretText | 3B848449488F8A90A66B042F5BA648C9 |
```
```suggestion
| plain_text   | EncryptedText                    |
|--------------|----------------------------------|
| MySecretText | 48ACB92DB61B99F84CFF35B2DEC31350 |
```

> ### Syntax

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### MD5 function
```

> `MD5()` calculates the MD5 (message-digest algorithm) hash of a string.
> This means that the value is returned as a string of 32 hexadecimal digits, or NULL if the argument was NULL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MD5()`: Calculates the MD5 (message-digest algorithm) hash of a string. This means that the value is returned as a string of 32 hexadecimal digits, or NULL if the argument was NULL.
```

> `MD5(string)`

Reviewer: Put this inside a pseudo-block and place a Syntax header above it

### Example

In the following example, there are 3 columns (one of them is an auto_increment) that correspond to two queues.
The table **users2** below will take the values from username and from password and then `MD5(string)` will convert the password's value into a **message-digest algorithm** as HashValue.

Below a complete example using MySQL code:

```sql

> CREATE TABLE users2 (
>     id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
>     username VARCHAR(50),
>     password VARCHAR(50)
> );
> 
> INSERT INTO users (username, password) VALUES
> ('user1', 'password1'),
> ('user2', 'password2');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE TABLE users2 (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    username VARCHAR(50),
    password VARCHAR(50)
);

INSERT INTO users (username, password) VALUES
('user1', 'password1'),
('user2', 'password2');

SELECT username, password, MD5(password) AS HashValue FROM users2;
```

```

> The output will be a 32-character hexadecimal string. 
> 
> ```shell
> -- Query to select the MD5 hash of a password
> SELECT username, password, MD5(password) AS HashValue FROM users2;
> ```
>  
> | username | password  | HashValue                        |
> |----------|-----------|----------------------------------|
> | user1    | password1 | 7c6a180b36896a0a8c02787eeafb0e4c |
> | user2    | password2 | 6cb75f652a9b52798eb6cf2201057c73 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output will be a 32-character hexadecimal string. 
 
| username | password  | HashValue                        |
|----------|-----------|----------------------------------|
| user1    | password1 | 7c6a180b36896a0a8c02787eeafb0e4c |
| user2    | password2 | 6cb75f652a9b52798eb6cf2201057c73 |
```

> > [!NOTE] 
> > The HashValues are the 32-character hexadecimal string, which represents the MD5 hash of the input string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The HashValues are the 32-character hexadecimal string, which represents the MD5 hash of the input string.
```

The hashed password can also be stored in the database instead of the plain text revealing the password.
Here is how it is possible to modify the table and insertion process to store hashed passwords:

```sql

> CREATE TABLE users3 (
>     id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
>     username VARCHAR(50),
>     hashed_password CHAR(40)
> );
> 
> INSERT INTO users3 (username, hashed_password) VALUES
> ('user1', MD5('password1')),
> ('user2', MD5('password2'));

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE TABLE users3 (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    username VARCHAR(50),
    hashed_password CHAR(40)
);

INSERT INTO users3 (username, hashed_password) VALUES
('user1', MD5('password1')),
('user2', MD5('password2'));

SELECT username, hashed_password FROM users3;
```

```

> The output would be:
> 
> ```shell
> #Query to verify data insertion
> SELECT username, hashed_password FROM users3;
> ```
> 
> | username | hashed_password                  |
> |----------|----------------------------------|
> | user1    | 7c6a180b36896a0a8c02787eeafb0e4c |
> | user2    | 6cb75f652a9b52798eb6cf2201057c73 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output would be:

| username | hashed_password                  |
|----------|----------------------------------|
| user1    | 7c6a180b36896a0a8c02787eeafb0e4c |
| user2    | 6cb75f652a9b52798eb6cf2201057c73 |
```

> With this approach it is possible to make sure that passwords are stored securely in the database. 
> During user login, it is possible to compare the MD5 hash of the entered password with the stored hashed password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this approach, it is possible to make sure that passwords are stored securely in the database. During user login, it is possible to compare the MD5 hash of the entered password with the stored hashed password.
```

> ## Conclusion
> 
> These are some examples of primary built-in functions in MySQL across various categories, illustrating its usage with examples. 
> Each function serves a specific purpose which allows making data manipulation and querying in MySQL in a more efficient and powerful way.
> More examples in the [MySQL Docs page](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.4/en/built-in-function-reference.html).
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Conclusion

These are some examples of primary built-in functions in MySQL across various categories, illustrating its usage with examples. Each function serves a specific purpose which allows making data manipulation and querying in MySQL in a more efficient and powerful way.
```
